Title: Live Content Description: Fetched live Source: https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/digital-health/articles/10.3389/fdgth.2026.1800132/full --- Frontiers | Voice disorders classification using machine learning: a scoping review Frontiers in Digital Health About us About us Who we are Mission and values History Leadership Awards Impact and progress Frontiers&#39; impact Our annual reports Thought leadership Researcher perspectives Publishing model How we publish Open access Quality and research integrity Peer review Technology and platforms Research Topics Publish your data with FAIR² Fee policy Services Societies National consortia Institutional partnerships Collaboration and indexation More from Frontiers Frontiers Forum Frontiers Planet Prize Press office Sustainability Career opportunities Contact us All journals All articles Submit manuscript Search Frontiers in Digital Health Sections Sections Connected Health Digital Mental Health Ethical Digital Health Health Communications and Behavior Change Health Informatics Health Technology Implementation Human Factors and Digital Health Personalized Medicine Articles Research Topics Editorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editors Mission and scope Facts Journal sections Open access statement Copyright statement Quality For authors Why submit? Article types Author guidelines Editor guidelines Publishing fees Submission checklist Contact editorial office About us About us Who we are Mission and values History Leadership Awards Impact and progress Frontiers&#39; impact Our annual reports Thought leadership Researcher perspectives Publishing model How we publish Open access Quality and research integrity Peer review Technology and platforms Research Topics Publish your data with FAIR² Fee policy Services Societies National consortia Institutional partnerships Collaboration and indexation More from Frontiers Frontiers Forum Frontiers Planet Prize Press office Sustainability Career opportunities Contact us All journals All articles Submit manuscript Frontiers in Digital Health Sections Sections Connected Health Digital Mental Health Ethical Digital Health Health Communications and Behavior Change Health Informatics Health Technology Implementation Human Factors and Digital Health Personalized Medicine Articles Research Topics Editorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editors Mission and scope Facts Journal sections Open access statement Copyright statement Quality For authors Why submit? Article types Author guidelines Editor guidelines Publishing fees Submission checklist Contact editorial office Frontiers in Digital Health Sections Sections Connected Health Digital Mental Health Ethical Digital Health Health Communications and Behavior Change Health Informatics Health Technology Implementation Human Factors and Digital Health Personalized Medicine Articles Research Topics Editorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editors Mission and scope Facts Journal sections Open access statement Copyright statement Quality For authors Why submit? Article types Author guidelines Editor guidelines Publishing fees Submission checklist Contact editorial office Submit manuscript Search REVIEW article Front. Digit. Health , 08 June 2026 Sec. Connected Health Volume 8 - 2026 | https://doi.org/10.3389/fdgth.2026.1800132 Published in Frontiers in Digital Health Connected Health 5.2 impact factor 6.8 citescore Part of a Research Topic Scalable Methods and Emerging Technologies to Advance Clinical Implementation of Vocal Biomarkers Submission open 17k views 9 articles Editor &amp; Reviewers Edited by H B Hugo Botha Reviewed by J M José Manuel Ramírez Sánchez Y C Yat Chun AU Outline Abstract 1 Introduction 2 Methods 3 Results 4 Discussion 5 Conclusions Statements Footnotes References Figures and Tables Figure 1 View in article Figure 2 View in article Figure 3 View in article Figure 4 View in article Figure 5 View in article Figure 6 View in article Table 1 Database usage across the articles in this review. Naming convention of databases follow articles included in this review. View in article Table 2 Summary table of challenges in automatied voice disorder classification and recommendations. View in article REVIEW article Front. Digit. Health , 08 June 2026 Sec. Connected Health Volume 8 - 2026 | https://doi.org/10.3389/fdgth.2026.1800132 Voice disorders classification using machine learning: a scoping review R G Rijul Gupta 1 C T Craig T. Jin 1 D R Dhanshree R. Gunjawate 2,3 D D Duy Duong Nguyen 2 B S Brian Stasak 2 A M Antonia M. Chacon 2 C M Catherine Madill 2 * 1. Computing and Audio Research Laboratory, School of Electrical and Information Engineering, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia 2. Voice Research Laboratory, Sydney School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia 3. Department of Audiology and Speech Language Pathology, Kasturba Medical College Mangalore, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Mangalore, India See more Article metrics View details Abstract Objectives: This review aims to identify the key barriers to clinical application of Machine Learning (ML) in multi-class voice disorder classification. Design: Scoping Review. Methods: A comprehensive scoping review of research published between 2013 and May 2025 in seven clinical and engineering databases was conducted. Articles that applied ML techniques to classify voice disorders were examined, excluding publications limited to binary classification (e.g., healthy vs. pathological). Data were extracted from the included articles to analyze patterns in the specific voice disorder classification classes, database selection, the input data attributes, vocal tasks, diagnostic labelling, and the applied ML classification techniques. Results: In total, 10,401 articles that addressed voice disorder classification were screened from which 80 used ML techniques for multi-class classification. Results revealed considerable variation in selection of databases, voice disorder diagnostic labels, amount and type of input data (e.g., voice tasks and demographics questionnaire), and classification techniques. These inconsistencies prevent robust comparisons and therefore identification of state-of-the-art solutions, which would typically mature to clinical applications. Discussions: Variations in classification tasks make it difficult to compare results across studies. The inconsistency found in terms of class imbalance, sample size, and total number of classes investigated, means there is no baseline for comparing and exploring various classification techniques. Finally, variations in testing methods such as using different test set types and sizes or using cross validation limit comparisons across articles. Conclusions: This review identified considerable variations in the diagnostic labels associated with voice disorder classification, data availability per selected label, and testing methodology. Such variation limits comparability and undermines the generalization of ML models. The lack of consensus across the automated classification pipeline – from selection of which disorders should be classified using ML systems, to constructing test sets and measuring performance – are likely to be critical barriers to clinical application. These barriers must be addressed to realise the potential for using voice as a biomarker of other systemic diseases. 1 Introduction Voice disorder classification is a crucial early stage in the increasingly expanding field of Voice AI (artificial intelligence), which is expected to revolutionize healthcare ( 1 ). As the potential for using voice as a biomarker of voice-affecting conditions grows—from monitoring neurological and cardiovascular health to detecting degenerative diseases —its role in voice disorder classification becomes a critical testing ground. This is because AI is a non-invasive and objective method that can extract voice features, determine whether a voice is normal or disordered, and classify the severity of disorder ( 2 ). Voice AI is expected to detect diseases that may subtly influence the voice as its algorithms work on acoustic measures reflecting vocal characteristics. Acoustic voice recordings are important data sources to reliably detect and diagnose voice disorders using AI, with broader applications as the health system faces significant challenges related to specialist shortage, long wait time, and diagnosis reliability. Despite a significant increase in the number of studies during the last decade, no study has successfully bridged the gap between experimental research and clinical application. The Vox4Health ( 3 ) has reached clinical trials in 2018 but failed to transition into an accessible clinical product. It remains unclear whether this failure is due to limited clinical applicability, inconsistent ML results, or other implementation challenges (e.g., limited data resource, diagnostic metadata agreement). Identifying these barriers is crucial to guiding future research and ensuring the transition to clinical use. The challenge of voice disorder classification from acoustic signals is to reliably and accurately support and even replicate the decision making of clinicians. Ear-Nose-Throat specialists (ENT) and speech-language pathologists (SLP) use several different “diagnostic classification frameworks” 1 for voice disorders such as the Classification Manual for Voice Disorders-I ( 4 ), Morrison et al. ( 5 ), Baker et al. ( 6 ), and Payten et al. ( 7 ). These frameworks are structured differently with some being based on symptoms, while others are based on etiology. All frameworks have multi-level classification, involving grouping of different diagnoses into classes of similar symptoms or causes. For example, Payten&#39;s hierarchical framework describes 3 types of voice disorders, Organic, Muscle Tension and Psychogenic, under which there are sub-classes (e.g., Primary, Secondary and Adaptive Muscle Tension) followed by a list of labels for different individual diagnoses . The problem is that ENTs and SLPs do not always use the same frameworks, leading to a lack of consensus of terminology and diagnostic classification within the field. Despite this, the interest in automated classification of voice disorders remains high. Figure 1 outlines the five stages of an ML project: 1) Data Collection involves identifying disorders to classify and gathering relevant data. 2) Feature Encoding transforms raw data into numerical features, including spectrogram generation from audio or mapping categories to numbers. 3) Development selects, develops and trains ML models on the data. 4) Testing evaluates ML models using unseen data and eventually clinical trials. 5) Deployment enables real-world applications. Figure 1 Overview of the machine learning pipeline for voice disorder classification, from data collection to clinical deployment. Sub-steps where current research lacks rigor and where critical improvements are needed are highlighted in red. Icons from Flaticon: “ Karaoke ” by Flat Icons, “ Sound Waves ” by Freepik, “ Learning ” by Freepik, “ Exam Time ” by brick-stock and “ Project Launch ” by Freepik, licensed under Flaticon License . The majority of research in voice disorder classification has designed the Data Collection stage for exploring binary classification e.g., between healthy and disordered voice samples, and between healthy and a specific disorder [e.g., Glottic Neoplasm, Recurrent Laryngeal Nerve Palsy, Spasmodic Dysphonia, Vocal Fold Paralysis ( 8 – 10 )]. This approach may not be clinically useful as the outcome only allows discrimination between disordered and non-disordered status or only applies to several voice disorders. To date, nine literature reviews have been published, none of which have provided consistent data about the application of multi-class ML classification. In the most recent review, Liu et al. ( 11 ) examined the clinical readiness of ML systems in voice disorder classification. They found that only 24 of the selected studies (29%) focused on classification, within which an unspecified subset addressed multi-class classification. Al-Hussain et al. ( 12 ) provided valuable insights by focusing on articles published before 2021 that compared a particular disorder with healthy control subjects, though it is limited to binary classification. Hecker et al. ( 13 ) examined trends in the literature before 2021, offering a broad overview but without a direct comparison of methodologies or a focus on challenges to clinical application. Idrisoglu et al. ( 2 ) explored articles published before 2023, addressing voice disorders in neurological diseases like Parkinson&#39;s and dementia, which offered useful context but did not fully capture the breadth of voice disorders. Syed et al. ( 14 ) focus on studies utilizing published databases such as the Saarbruecken Voice Database (SVD) ( 15 ), Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary (MEEI) ( 16 ), and Arabic Voice Pathology Database (AVPD) ( 17 ) which, while comprehensive, excluded research that use unpublished or private data, limiting their scope. Sindhu and Sainin ( 18 ) examined studies using Deep Learning (DL) techniques, which, although promising, represented a smaller subset of methods in voice disorder classification. A two-part scoping review ( 19 , 20 ) investigated variations in terminology across the literature, helping to clarify definitional differences but not focusing on methodological or clinical gaps. Finally, five non-systematic reviews provide broad overviews of the field: a survey of ML techniques and features ( 21 ), a focused review on Mel Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCC) ( 22 ), and three reviews covering subset of datasets, features, and models used in the voice disorder classification pipeline ( 23 – 25 ). These reviews offered broad insights but lacked a deep exploration of specific challenges in clinical application. While distinguishing between healthy and pathological voice samples is valuable, clinicians require ML tools that can process beyond simple differentiation to assist them accurately identify specific pathologies. The real benefit lies in a tool&#39;s ability to classify voice samples into specific subtypes of pathology, facilitating timely and efficient redirection of patients to the appropriate specialists, ultimately reducing the burden on the primary healthcare system. Researchers are beginning to recognize the limitations of binary classification between healthy and pathological only as evidenced by emerging research on multi-class classification ( 26 – 28 ) which distinguishes between multiple pathologies, or multiple pathologies and healthy samples. This review aims to identify key challenges and methodological issues in the existing literature on multi-class voice disorder classification, with a focus on factors that may impact the efficacy and clinical implementation of ML systems in this domain. 2 Methods To systematically navigate the collected 24,696 research articles, the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses extension for Scoping Review guidelines (PRISMA-ScR) ( 29 ) were used. The PRISMA-ScR checklist for this review has been provided in Supplementary Appendix A . The scope of the review was restricted to studies incorporating multi-class classification. 2.1 Protocol The protocol for this review was published in BMJ Open on 24 February 2024 ( 30 ). 2.2 Data sources MEDLINE, Embase, Scopus, CINAHL, MEDLINE, Embase, Scopus, CINAHL, Compendex, Web of Science and IEEE Xplore were selected for literature searching for the review. This represents a coterie of databases that encompass both the medical and engineering discipline which are critical to address the inter-disciplinary nature of this work. We included both conferences and journals articles. Grey literature was not included. 2.3 Search strategy The search strategy included six different search areas (Voice disorders, Organic voice disorders, Muscle tension dysphonia, Functional voice disorders, Engineering challenge, Engineering technique) that were gathered from keywords within existing literature and suggestions from the authors, which is available in Supplementary Appendix B . These keywords were then combined to formulate a comprehensive search strategy with the assistance of librarians at The University of Sydney Library, NSW, Australia. The search strategy was then refined to accommodate the syntactical requirements for different databases. The full search strategy is provided in the Supplementary material Appendix C . Following the explosive growth in ML research since the origins of AlexNet ( 31 ) in 2012, we conducted a search from 2013 to 2024. Since broad search terms were used such as “classification” instead of specific techniques like “machine learning” or “neural networks”, our search resulted in a collection of related literature substantially larger than would otherwise be obtained, and three times larger than the largest existing scoping review on this topic ( 19 ). Repeat searches in 2024 and 2025 were conducted to capture any literature published between 2023 and May 2025. The final search was completed on 19th of May 2025. 2.4 Article selection process The search results from the afore-mentioned data sources were imported into a web-based literature review management tool, Covidence ( 32 ), which was used for both de-duplication of results and Title and Abstract screening. The selection criteria were discussed with all reviewers as well as uploaded into Covidence for easy access during the screening process. 2.4.1 Inclusion criteria Publications were selected if they were peer-reviewed journal articles and conference proceedings that met the following criteria: Investigated diagnostic classification of voice disorders using ML systems (in all or part of the study) Explored the application of ML for screening, identification and assessment of voice disorders Included individuals for ML investigation with and without voice disorders irrespective of their language, region, gender, age, and ethnicity Were published in the English Language Were published from 1st January 2013 to 19th May 2025 2.4.2 Exclusion criteria Publications were excluded based on the following criteria: Describes visual-only inspection e.g., laryngeal imaging, laryngoscopy findings Describes binary-only classification Healthy vs. Pathological Healthy vs. Any single disorder (e.g., Parkinson’s disease) One disorder vs. another disorder One disorder vs. collection of other disorders (for e.g., Parkinson vs. all voice disorders in a dataset) Focus solely on pediatric disorder detection because there are no public databases that have pediatric samples Investigates only app development Were published in languages other than English Con 